Telling the customer why the should care about custom scripts (#530)
OctopusDeploy/docs: docs/deployment-examples/custom-scripts/index.md

position: 50
---

> As a convention-oriented deployment tool, Octopus can perform a number of actions automatically, such as deploying and configuring common types of applications to popular hosting environments. In these situations, we have built everything you need into Octopus. Sometimes however you’ll need to do more than the built-in conventions support, and that’s where custom scripts come in.

Reviewer: minor tweak:
```suggestion
As a convention-oriented deployment tool, Octopus can perform a number of actions automatically, such as configuring common types of applications and deploying them to popular hosting environments. For these situations, we have built everything you need into Octopus. Sometimes, however, you need to do more than the built-in conventions can support, and that’s where custom scripts come in.
```

## Supported Script Types

Octopus supports the following scripting environments:

 - PowerShell scripts (.ps1)
 - C# scripts (.csx) using [ScriptCS](https://github.com/scriptcs/scriptcs)
 - Bash scripts (.sh)
 - F# scripts (.fsx)
 - Python scripts (.py)

 Octopus can run these scripts on almost any operating system as long as the script runtime is installed and configured correctly.

## What You Can Do With Custom Scripts

If an activity can be scripted, Octopus can run that script as a standalone activity or as part of a larger orchestration.

In the context of Octopus, your custom scripts get the following extra benefits:

>  - Your script can use [variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/index.md) managed by Octopus including [secrets](/docs/deployment-process/variables/sensitive-variables.md), [complex variable expressions](docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-substitutions.md), and [filters](/docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-filters.md). Learn about [using variables in scripts](using-variables-in-scripts.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your script can use [variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/index.md) managed by Octopus, including [secrets](/docs/deployment-process/variables/sensitive-variables.md), [complex variable expressions](docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-substitutions.md), and [filters](/docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-filters.md). Learn about [using variables in scripts](using-variables-in-scripts.md).
```

>  - Your script can use [variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/index.md) managed by Octopus, including [secrets](/docs/deployment-process/variables/sensitive-variables.md), [complex variable expressions](docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-substitutions.md), and [filters](/docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-filters.md). Learn about [using variables in scripts](using-variables-in-scripts.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can use [variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/index.md) managed by Octopus, including [secrets](/docs/deployment-process/variables/sensitive-variables.md), [complex variable expressions](docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-substitutions.md), and [filters](/docs/deployment-process/variables/variable-filters.md). Learn about [using variables in scripts](using-variables-in-scripts.md).
```

>  - Your script can be executed across your entire fleet of servers, or a selection of servers, in a controlled fashion. Learn about [deployment targets](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/index.md) and [workers](/docs/infrastructure/workers/index.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can be executed across your entire fleet of servers, or a selection of servers, in a controlled fashion. Learn about [deployment targets](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/index.md) and [workers](/docs/infrastructure/workers/index.md).
```

>  - Your script can use the contents of a package. Learn about [using files from packages in scripts](scripts-in-packages/reference-files-within-a-package.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can use the contents of a package. Learn about [using files from packages in scripts](scripts-in-packages/reference-files-within-a-package.md).
```

 - Your script can log special messages to control the format or report progress. Learn about [logging messages in scripts](logging-messages-in-scripts.md).

>  - Your script can set output variables making these values available to other steps in your process. Learn about [output variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/output-variables.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can set output variables making these values available to other steps in your process. Learn about [output variables](/docs/deployment-process/variables/output-variables.md).
```

>  - Your script can collect files and store them in Octopus. Learn about [publishing artifacts](/docs/deployment-process/artifacts.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can collect files and store them in Octopus. Learn about [publishing artifacts](/docs/deployment-process/artifacts.md).
```

>  - Your script can be pre-authenticated and bootstrapped into a cloud provider. Learn about [AWS CLI scripts](aws-cli-scripts.md) and [Azure CLI scripts](azure-powershell-scripts.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can be pre-authenticated and bootstrapped into a cloud provider. Learn about [AWS CLI scripts](aws-cli-scripts.md) and [Azure CLI scripts](azure-powershell-scripts.md).
```

>  - Your script can be pre-authenticated and bootstrapped into an external service or server cluster. Learn about [Kubernetes deployments](/docs/deployment-examples/kubernetes-deployments/index.md) and [Service Fabric deployments](/docs/deployment-examples/azure-deployments/service-fabric/index.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Your scripts can be pre-authenticated and bootstrapped into an external service or server cluster. Learn about [Kubernetes deployments](/docs/deployment-examples/kubernetes-deployments/index.md) and [Service Fabric deployments](/docs/deployment-examples/azure-deployments/service-fabric/index.md).
```

>  - Your can define reusable functions for your scripts to use. Learn about [script modules](docs/deployment-examples/custom-scripts/script-modules.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - You can define reusable functions for your scripts to use. Learn about [script modules](docs/deployment-examples/custom-scripts/script-modules.md).
```

 - You can run custom scripts when Octopus deploys a package. Learn about the [deploy a package step](/docs/deployment-examples/package-deployments/index.md) and [the different stages where your script can run](/docs/deployment-examples/package-deployments/package-deployment-feature-ordering.md).
 - You can build reusable step templates containing your own scripts which can be used across multiple projects. Learn about [step templates](/docs/deployment-process/steps/custom-step-templates.md).
 - You can run ad hoc scripts for administrative tasks. Learn about the [script console](/docs/administration/managing-infrastructure/script-console.md).
 - You can run custom scripts as part of a health check. Learn about [machine policies](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/machine-policies.md).

## Where to Store Your Scripts

Octopus can execute scripts from a variety of locations, all with different benefits:

  1. You can author and store your scripts directly in Octopus. Learn about the [run a script step](run-a-script-step.md) and [deploy a package step](/docs/deployment-examples/package-deployments/index.md).

>   2. You can author your scripts and publish them as step templates for other projects to use. Learn about [step templates](/docs/deployment-process/steps/custom-step-templates.md).

Reviewer: Is it worth mentioning that these are also stored in Octopus?

Author: There are ways people can author and manage their step templates in source control as well. I might leave that detail for the step templates area.

  3. You can develop your scripts and store them in a source control repository, like git, and Octopus can execute these scripts from within a package. Learn about [deployment process as code](/docs/deployment-patterns/deployment-process-as-code.md) and [running scripts in packages](scripts-in-packages/index.md).
  4. You can develop your scripts and store them in GitHub, then publish them as a release, which can be consumed by Octopus. Learn about [using the GitHub feed](/docs/packaging-applications/package-repositories/github-feeds.md).

## How Your Scripts are Executed by Octopus

> The precise details depend on the context within which your script is running, however Octopus follows this general process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The precise details depend on the context within which your script is running, however, Octopus follows this general process:
```

>  1. Octopus transfers the script to the execution environment along with variables, packages, script modules, and anything else required to run the script. This is done via the Tentacle agent or SSH session into a temporary work directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. Octopus transfers the script to the execution environment along with the variables, packages, script modules, and anything else required to run the script. This is done via the Tentacle agent or SSH session into a temporary work directory.
```

>  2. The Tentacle agent or SSH session invokes the [open-source Calamari project](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari) to bootstrap your script providing access to variables and helper functions. _You can see how your scripts are bootstrapped in the [Calamari source code](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari/blob/master/source/Calamari.Shared/Integration/Scripting)._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 2. The Tentacle agent or SSH session invokes the [open-source Calamari project](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari) to bootstrap your script and provide access to variables and helper functions. _You can see how your scripts are bootstrapped in the [Calamari source code](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari/blob/master/source/Calamari.Shared/Integration/Scripting)._
```

 3. Calamari invokes your script, streaming log messages back to the Octopus Server.

>  4. Any artifacts published by your script are transferred back to the Octopus Server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 4. Any artifacts published by your scripts are transferred back to the Octopus Server.
```

 5. The temporary work directory is cleaned up.

### Working Directories {#Customscripts-Workingdirectories}

When Calamari executes your scripts, it does so within the context of a working directory. The working directory is a temporary location stored under the home folder you configure when setting up a deployment target or worker.

If you're executing a script contained within a package, the package contents will be uncompressed and copied to this directory, but the working directory is the directory containing the script within it. After the script has finished executing, the working directory will be cleaned up. Learn about [copying the contents of the working directory](/docs/support/copy-working-directory.md).

### Security and Permissions {#Customscripts-Securityandpermissions}

> Keep in mind that scripts are executed in the context of the account that the Tentacle agent or SSH session runs as. Learn about [running Tentacle as a different user account](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/windows-targets/running-tentacle-under-a-specific-user-account.md).

Reviewer: I'm having a bit of trouble parsing this first sentence, I know what you mean but `runs as` trips me up, or maybe there too many sticky (connecting) words. I want to say, `...in the context of the account that is running the Tentacle agent or SSH session`, but that might not be quite right.  Maybe:
```suggestion
When scripts are executed, it is in the context of the account that the Tentacle agent or SSH session is running as. Learn about [running Tentacle as a different user account](/docs/infrastructure/deployment-targets/windows-targets/running-tentacle-under-a-specific-user-account.md).
```

:::

### Script Integrity

Octopus does not provide support for script integrity. While this may sound alarming, there are very good reasons for this approach.

For example, when Calamari invokes PowerShell.exe, it uses the `Unrestricted` execution policy for the session. You can see how PowerShell scripts are executed in more detail by [looking at the open-source Calamari project](https://github.com/OctopusDeploy/Calamari/tree/master/source/Calamari.Shared/Integration/Scripting/WindowsPowerShell).

Learn about [script integrity](/docs/administration/security/script-integrity.md).

### Developing and Testing Scripts {#Customscripts-Testingscripts}

We recommend the following approaches for developing and testing your scripts, in order of preference:

 1. Build your script to use script arguments as inputs so it can be invoked with equal fidelity from Octopus or directly in your development environment. You can test your scripts by invoking them directly in a development environment with a very fast feedback cycle. Learn about [passing parameters to scripts](passing-parameters-to-scripts.md). The only difference in this approach may be the user context the script runs in.

>  2. Build your script as a reusable step template and test it using the `Run Now` feature. [Learn about step templates](/docs/deployment-process/steps/custom-step-templates.md). The only difference to this approach is the absence of some deployment-specific variables provided by Octopus when actually running a deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 2. Build your script as a reusable step template and test it using the `Run Now` feature. [Learn about step templates](/docs/deployment-process/steps/custom-step-templates.md). The only difference to this approach is the absence of deployment-specific variables provided by Octopus when actually running a deployment.
```
